---
layout: post
title: Reflection Blog Post
---



# What did you achieve in your project? 



In the machine learning algorithm part of the project, I taught myself some models that were not covered in the previous courses. The process was interesting, and I also gained some new insights by comparing models with each other. Optimizing these prediction models was not as difficult as I thought it would be, and learning how to change the parameters and hyperparameters of the models to improve their prediction accuracy was the most important task in my opinion during the project. Also, I gained some programming knowledge from my teammates outside of the classroom in the WebApp development department. Overall, it was a successful project and it met our expectations.





# What are two aspects of your project that you are **especially proud** of?



It is clear that the trained prediction model achieves our desired ideal state and has a good prediction accuracy. After all, this was the most critical part of our entire project, and I think we did a good job on this part. 



This is a successful practical application of using mathematical, statistical and python knowledge to solve a real-world health problem. If we had more time, we would spend more time and use better quality data and various tools to build a more comprehensive interactive WebApp for scientific diabetes prediction.





# What are **two things** you would suggest doing to further improve your project?



If there is enough time, I would like to make changes to our dataset. Since the chosen dataset is rather old, it may cause some bias in the prediction, such as false positives and false negatives. Therefore, going to some professional medical institutions for data counting and organizing it into a new data set will greatly likely improve the prediction accuracy of our data.



In addition to this, learning some knowledge about deep learning and optimizing the model will also provide better prediction accuracy for our prediction model. The available machine learning algorithms are limited, and if we can learn some new knowledge to modify these models with hyperparameters or use other higher quality models, our model prediction will become more efficient.





# How does what you achieved compare to what you set out to do in your proposal? 



We achieved all the goals in the proposal, but we don't intend to stop the project there. We want to apply the new knowledge we learned through the follow-up to the project. For example, we want to make some changes to the WebApp development such as setting up pop-ups. Overall, the project has a lot of room for improvement in both machine learning and WebApp, and we are looking forward to its changes.





# What are **three things** you learned from the experience of completing your project? Data analysis techniques? Python packages? Git + GitHub? Etc?



A more comprehensive and systematic review and learning of machine learning by training and coding some models.



GitHub was critical to this project. Through GitHub, my team and I were able to collaborate better on every little detail of this project.



I also gained some scientific understanding of diabetes and some of its characteristics before and after the onset of the disease. I think it brought much more meaning to me than this project.





# How will your experience completing this project will help you in your future studies or career?



Personally, this has given me a good overall understanding of using scientific tools to solve real-life health problems. I've also recently been applying to master's programs on biostatistics and data science, which has helped me learn more about how to solve problems through programming. I am very interested in CNN in this class and I will learn more about it in the future. Also, this project taught me about the importance of collaborative workflows, which will help me know how to deal with tricky problems when I encounter group work later on. webApp interaction was also great, and it made me very interested in learning html and css languages. Finally, I would like to thank my group members and professors for their help, we could not have succeeded in our project without their help.

